\input

../6001mac

\psetheader{SAMPLE}{Simple Problem Set}
\medskip
\begin{flushleft}
Reading: 
\begin{itemize}

\item Text (SICP 2nd Edition by Abelson \& Sussman): section 1.1

\end{itemize}
\end{flushleft}
\smallskip

The purpose of the exercises below is to familiarize you with the basics
of Scheme language and interpreter. Spending a little time on simple
mechanics now will save you a great deal of time over the rest of the
semester.

# 1. Before Turning on your Computer

Read the course notes through section 1.1. Then, predict what the
interpreter will print in response to evaluation of each of the
following expressions. Assume that the sequence is evaluated in the
order in which it is presented here.

\beginlisp

(- 8 9) `\null`{=latex} (\> 3.7 4.4) `\null`{=latex} (- (if (\> 3 4) 7
10) (/ 16 10)) `\null`{=latex} (define b 13) `\null
13`{=latex} `\null`{=latex} b `\null`{=latex} \> `\null`{=latex} (define
square (lambda (x) (\* x x))) `\null`{=latex} square `\null`{=latex}
(square 13) `\null`{=latex} (square b) `\null`{=latex} (square (square
(/ b 1.3))) `\null`{=latex} (define multiply-by-itself square)
`\null`{=latex} (multiply-by-itself b) `\null`{=latex} (define a b)
`\null`{=latex} (= a b) `\null`{=latex} (if (= (\* b a) (square 13)) (\<
a b) (- a b)) `\null`{=latex} (cond ((\>= a 2) b) ((\< (square b)
(multiply-by-itself a)) (/ 1 0)) (else (abs (- (square a) b))))
`\endlisp`{=latex}

# 2. Getting started with the Scheme Interpreter

In the Scheme interpreter, you will use a text-editing system called
Edwin, which is an editor closely resembling the widely used editor
Emacs. Even if you are already familiar with Emacs, you should take some
time *now* to run the Emacs/Edwin tutorial. This can be invoked by
typing `C-h` followed by `t`. You will probably get bored before you
finish the tutorial. (It's too long, anyway.) But at least skim all the
topics so you know what's there. You'll need to gain reasonable facility
with the editor in order to complete the exercises below.

## Evaluating expressions

After you have learned something about Edwin, go to the Scheme buffer
(i.e., the buffer named `scheme*`).[^1] As with any buffer, you can type
Scheme expressions, or any other text into this buffer. What
distinguishes the Scheme buffer from other buffers is the fact that
underlying this buffer is a Scheme evaluator, which you can ask to
evaluate expressions, as explained in the section of the tutorial
entitled "Evaluating Scheme expressions."

Type in and evaluate (one by one) the expressions from section 1 of this
assignment to see how well you predicted what the system would print. If
the system gives a response that you do not understand, ask for help
from a lab tutor or from the person sitting next to you.

Observe that some of the examples printed above in section 1 are
indented and displayed over several lines for readability. An expression
may be typed on a single line or on several lines; the Scheme
interpreter ignores redundant spaces and carriage returns. It is to your
advantage to format your work so that you (and others) can read it
easily. It is also helpful in detecting errors introduced by incorrectly
placed parentheses. For example the two expressions

\beginlisp

(\* 5 (- 2 (/ 4 2) (/ 8 3))) `\null`{=latex} (\* 5 (- 2 (/ 4 2)) (/ 8
3)) `\endlisp`{=latex}

`\noindent`{=latex} look deceptively similar but have different values.
Properly indented, however, the difference is obvious.

\beginlisp

(\* 5 (- 2 (/ 4 2) (/ 8 3))) `\null`{=latex} (\* 5 (- 2 (/ 4 2)) (/ 8
3)) `\endlisp`{=latex}

Edwin provides several commands that "pretty-print" your code, e.g.,
indents lines to reflect the inherent structure of the Scheme
expressions.[^2]

## Creating a file

Since the Scheme buffer will chronologically list all the expressions
you evaluate, and since you will generally have to try more than one
version of the same procedure as part of the coding and debugging
process, it is usually better to keep your procedure definitions in a
separate buffer, rather than to work only in the Scheme buffer. You can
save this other buffer in a file on your disk so you can split your lab
work over more than one session.

The basic idea is to create another buffer, into which you can type your
code, and later save that buffer in a disk file. You do this by typing
`C-x C-f` *filename*. If you already have a buffer open for that file
Edwin simply switches you into this buffer. Otherwise, Edwin will create
a new buffer for the file. If you give the system a name that has not
yet been used, with an extension of `.scm`, Edwin will automatically
create a new buffer with that file name, in `scheme` mode. In a
Scheme-mode buffer some editing commands treat text as code, for
example, typing `C-j` at the end of a line will move you to the next
line with appropriate indentation.

Once you are ready to transfer your procedures to Scheme, you can use
any of several commands: `M-z` to evaluate the current definition,
` ctrl-x ctrl-e` to evaluate the expression preceding the cursor, `M-o`
to evaluate the entire buffer, or using `M-x eval-region` to evaluate a
"marked" region in the buffer. Each of these commands will cause the
Scheme evaluator to evaluate the appropriate set of expressions (usually
definitions). By returning to the `scheme*` buffer, you can now use
these expressions.

To practice these ideas, create a new buffer, called ` ps1-ans.scm`. In
this buffer, create a definition for a simple procedure, by typing in
the following (verbatim):

\beginlisp

(define square (lambda (x) (\*x x))) `\endlisp`{=latex}

`\noindent`{=latex} Now evaluate this definition by using either `M-z`
or `M-o`. Go back to the Scheme buffer, and try evaluating `(square 4)`.

If you actually typed in the definition *exactly* as printed above, you
should have hit an error at this point. The system will now be offering
you a chance to enter the debugger. For now, type `Q` to quit the
evaluation (we'll see how to use the debugger below). Go back to the
`ps1-ans.scm` buffer and edit the definition to insert a space between
and `x`. Re-evaluate the definition, and return to Scheme and try
evaluating `(square 4)` again.

As a second method of evaluating expressions, try the following. Go to
the `scheme*` buffer, and again type in:

\beginlisp

(define square (lambda (x) (\*x x))) `\endlisp`{=latex}

Place the cursor at the end of the line, and type `C-x C-e` to evaluate
this expression. Again try `(square 4)`. When it fails, again use `Q` to
quit out of the debugger. This time, you should type `M-p` several
times, until the definition of `square` that you typed in appears on the
screen. Edit this definition to insert a space between and `x`, evaluate
the new expression, and use `M-p` to get back the expression
`(square 4)`. Make a habit of using `M-p`, rather than going back and
editing previous expressions in the Scheme buffer in place. That way,
the buffer will contain an intact record of your work.

# 3. The Scheme Debugger

While you work, you will often need to debug programs. This section
contains an exercise to acquaint you with some of the features of Scheme
to aid in debugging. Learning to use the debugging features will save
you much grief on later problem sets. Additional information about the
debugger can be found by typing `?` in the debugger.

Load the code for this problem set using the Edwin `C-x C-f` command.
Evaluate the code using `M-x eval-buffer`. This will load definitions of
the following three procedures `p1`, `p2` and `p3`:

\beginlisp

(define p1 (lambda (x y) (+ (p2 x y) (p3 x y)))) `\null`{=latex} (define
p2 (lambda (z w) (\* z w))) `\null`{=latex} (define p3 (lambda (a b) (+
(p2 a) (p2 b)))) `\endlisp`{=latex}

In the Scheme buffer, evaluate the expression `(p1 1 2)`. This should
signal an error, with the message:

\small

    ;The procedure #[compound-procedure P2] has been called with 1 argument
    ;it requires exactly 2 arguments.
    ;Type D to debug error, Q to quit back to REP loop: 

Don't panic. Beginners have a tendency, when they hit an error, to
quickly type `Q`, often without even reading the error message. Then
they stare at their code in the editor trying to see what the bug is.
Indeed, the example here is simple enough so that you probably can find
the bug by just reading the code. Instead, however, let's see how Scheme
can be coaxed into producing some helpful information about the error.

First of all, there is the error message itself. It tells you that the
error was caused by a procedure being called with one argument, which is
the wrong number of arguments for that procedure. Unfortunately, the
error message alone doesn't say where in the code the error occurred. In
order to find out more, you need to use the debugger. To do this type
`D` to start the debugger.

## Using the debugger

The debugger allows you to grovel around examining pieces of the
execution in progress, in order to learn more about what may have caused
the error. When you start the debugger, it will create a new window
showing two buffers. The top buffer should look like this.

\small

         COMMANDS:   ? - Help   q - Quit Debugger   e - Environment browser
    This is a debugger buffer:
    Lines identify stack frames, most recent first.
       Sx means frame is in subproblem number x
       Ry means frame is reduction number y
    The buffer below describes the current subproblem or reduction.
    -----------
    The *ERROR* that started the debugger is:
      The procedure #[compound-procedure 119 p2] has been called with 1 argument;
      it requires exactly 2 arguments.

    >S0  (#[compound-procedure 119 p2] 2)
        R0  (p2 b)
     S1  (+ (p2 a) #(p2 b)#)
        R0  (+ (p2 a) (p2 b))
        R1  (p3 x y)
     S2  (+ (p2 x y) #(p3 x y)#)
        R0  (+ (p2 x y) (p3 x y))
        R1  (p1 1 2)
     --more--

You can select a "frame" by clicking on its line with the mouse or by
using the ordinary cursor line-motion commands to move from line to
line. Notice that the bottom, information, buffer changes as the
selected line changes.

The frames in the list in the top buffer represent the steps in the
evaluation of the expression. There are two kinds of steps---subproblems
and reductions. For now, you should think of a reduction step as
transforming an expression into "more elementary" form, and think of a
subproblem as picking out a piece of a compound expression to work on.

So, starting at the bottom of the list and working upwards, we see
`(p1 1 2)`, which is the expression we tried to evaluate. The next line
up indicates that `(p1 1 2)` reduces to `(+ (p2 x y) (p3 x y))`. Above
that, we see that in order to evaluate this expression the interpreter
chose to work on the subproblem ` (p3 x y)`, and so on, moving upwards
until we reach the error: the call to `(p2 b)` from within the procedure
`p3` has only one argument, and `p2` requires two arguments.[^3]

Take a moment to examine the other debugger information (which will come
in handy as your programs become more complex). Specifically, in the top
buffer, select the line

\small

    >S2  (+ (p2 x y) #(p3 x y)#)

The bottom buffer should now look like this:

\small

                             SUBPROBLEM LEVEL: 2
    Expression (from stack):
     Subproblem being executed highlighted.
        (+ (p2 x y) (p3 x y))
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------
    ENVIRONMENT named: (user)
        p1 = #[compound-procedure 31 p1]
        p3 = #[compound-procedure 32 p3]
        p2 = #[compound-procedure 27 p2]
    ==> ENVIRONMENT created by the procedure: P1
          x = 1
          y = 2
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------
    ;EVALUATION may occur below in the environment of the selected frame.

The information here is in three parts. The first shows the expression
again, with the subproblem being worked on. The next major part of the
display shows information about the *environments*. We'll have a lot
more to say about environments later in the course, but, for now, notice
the line

\small

    ==> ENVIRONMENT created by the procedure: P1

This indicates that the evaluation of the current expression is within
procedure `p1`. Also we find the environment has two *bindings* that
specify the particular values of `x` and `y` referred to in the
expression, namely `x = 1` and `y = 2`. At the bottom of the description
buffer is an area where you can evaluate expressions in this environment
(which is often useful in debugging).

Before quitting the debugger try one final experiment (you may have
already done this). Continue to scroll down through the stack past the
line: `R1 (p1 1 2)` (you can also click the mouse on the line `–more–`
to show the next subproblem). You will then see additional frames that
various complicated expressions. What you are looking at is some of the
guts of the Scheme system---the part shown here is a piece of the
interpreter's read-eval-print program. In general, backing up from any
error will eventually land you in the guts of the system. (Yes: almost
all of the system is itself a Scheme program.)

You can type `q` to return to the Scheme top level interpreter.

# 4. Exploring the system

The following exercises are meant to help you practice editing and
debugging, and using on-line documentation.

#### Exercise 1: More debugging

The code you loaded for problem set 1 also defined three other
procedures, called `fold`, `spindle`, and `mutilate`. One of these
procedures contains an error. Evaluate the expression `(fold 1 2)`. What
is the error? How should the procedure be defined? (Notice that you can
examine the code for a procedure by using the `pp` ("pretty print")
command. For example, evaluating the expression `(pp fold)` will print
the definition of `fold`.

#### Exercise 2: Still more debugging

The code you loaded also contains a buggy definition of a procedure
meant to compute the factorials of positive integers:
$n!=n\cdot(n-1)\cdot(n-2)\cdots3\cdot2\cdot1$. Evaluate the expression
`(fact 5)` (which is supposed to return 120). Use the debugger to find
the bug and correct the definition. Compute the factorial of 243. Copy
the corrected definition and the value of `(fact 243)` into your
`ps1-ans.scm` buffer.

#### Exercise 3: Defining a simple procedure

The number of combinations of $n$ things taken $k$ at a time is given by
$n!/k!(n-k)!$. Define a procedure `(comb n k)` that computes the number
of combinations, and find the number of combinations of 243 things taken
90 at a time. Include your procedure definition and your answer in
`ps1-ans.scm`.

#### Exercise 4: Practice with the editor

Find the Free Software Foundation copyright notice at the end of the
Edwin tutorial. Copy it into `ps1-ans.scm`.

#### Exercise 5: Learning to use `Info`

Start up the `info` program with the Edwin command `M-x info`. `Info` is
a directory of useful information. You select a topic from the menu, by
typing `m` followed by the name of the topic. (You can type a few
characters that begin the topic name, and then type a space, and Edwin
will complete the name. One of the `info` options (type `h`) gives you a
brief tutorial in how to use the program. Use `info` to find the cost of
a 12-inch cheese pizza from Pizza Ring, and copy this to the answer
buffer.

#### Exercise 6: Hacker Jargon

The info `Jargon` entry is a collection of hacker terms that was
eventually published in 1983 as the book *The Hacker's Dictionary*. The
`New Jargon` info entry is an expanded version that was published in
1991 by MIT Press as *The New Hacker's Dictionary*. The old Jargon file
is structured as an `info` file, with submenus; the new version is a
single text file, which you can search. Find the definition of "Unix
conspiracy" from the new jargon file, and find the definition of "Phase
of the Moon" from either jargon file. Include these in the answer
buffer.

#### Exercise 7: Scheme documentation

The `Scheme` info entry is an on-line copy of the Scheme reference
manual that was distributed with the notes. Find the description of
"identifiers" in the documentation. What is the longest identifier in
the list of example identifiers?

#### Exercise 8: More documentation

There is an Edwin command that you can use to automatically re-indent
expressions. For example, if you have a procedure typed as

\beginlisp

(define test-procedure (lambda (a b) (cond ((\>= a 2) b) ((\< (square b)
(multiply-by-itself a)) (/ 1 0)) (else (abs (- (square a) b))))))
`\endlisp`{=latex}

`\noindent`{=latex} you can move the cursor to the beginning of the line
with the ` define`, type this Edwin command, and the expression will
automatically be re-indented as

\beginlisp

(define test-procedure (lambda (a b) (cond ((\>= a 2) b) ((\< (square b)
(multiply-by-itself a)) (/ 1 0)) (else (abs (- (square a) b))))))
`\endlisp`{=latex}

`\noindent`{=latex} Find the description of this command. What is the
command? Where did you find it?

#### Exercise 9: Running Shell Commands

If you run the Scheme interpreter within a \*nix environment, the Edwin
command `M-x shell` will create a shell buffer, which you can use to run
various \*nix programs. Some of the more interesting ones are `ls`,
` date`, and `echo`. For example, typing

\beginlisp

date `\endlisp`{=latex}

`\noindent`{=latex} will show you the current date and time (e.g.
`Tue Jul 2 15:39:45 EDT 1996`). See if you can figure out what the other
commands do, and copy your results into your answer buffer.

#### Exercise 10: Getting information from around the world

You can also use the finger program to query computers on the Internet,
all over the world. You can finger a particular name at some location,
or just finger the location (e.g., `finger @mit.edu`) to get general
information. Try fingering some of the following places:

-   `cs.berkeley.edu`---a computer run by the computer science
    department at UC Berkeley

-   `idt.unit.no`---a computer at the Norwegian Institute of Technology,
    a part of the The University of Trondheim, Norway.

-   `whitehouse.gov`---the White House

See what else you can find. Include some piece of this in your answer
file.

#### Exercise 11:

An *application* of an expression $E$ is an expression of the form
$(E\, E_1 \ldots E_n)$. This includes the case $n = 0$, corresponding to
an expression $(E)$. A *Curried application* of $E$ is either an
application of $E$ or an application of a Curried application of E. For
each of the procedures defined below, give a Curried application of the
procedure which evaluates to 3.

\beginlisp

(define foo1 (lambda (x) (\* x x))) `\endlisp`{=latex}

\beginlisp

(define foo2 (lambda (x y) (/ x y))) `\endlisp`{=latex}

\beginlisp

(define foo3 (lambda (x) (lambda (y) (/ x y)))) `\endlisp`{=latex}

\beginlisp

(define foo4 (lambda (x) (x 3))) `\endlisp`{=latex}

\beginlisp 

(define foo5 (lambda (x) (cond ((= x 2) (lambda () x)) (else (lambda ()
(\* x 3)))))) `\endlisp`{=latex}

\beginlisp

(define foo6 (lambda (x) (x (lambda (y) (y y))))) `\endlisp`{=latex}

Type in these definitions, and include a demonstration of your answers
in the answer buffer.

[^1]: If you don't know how to do this, go back and learn more about
    Edwin.

[^2]: Make a habit of typing `ctrl-j` at the end of a line, instead of
    ` enter`, when you enter Scheme expressions, so that the cursor will
    automatically indent to the right place.

[^3]: Notice that the call that produced the error was `(p2 b)`, and
    that `(p2 a)` would have also given an error. This indicates that in
    this case Scheme was evaluating the arguments to `+` in
    right-to-left order, which is something you may not have expected.
    You should never write code that depends for its correct execution
    on the order of evaluation of the arguments in a combination. The
    Scheme system does not guarantee that any particular order will be
    followed, nor even that this order will be the same each time a
    combination is evaluated.
